---
title: "Introductions"
date: 2022-12-17T16:44:57-08:00
# draft: true
---
Within higher education, the model of curriculum development by domain specialists, primarily faculty with knowledge in specialized fields that have no associations to the areas of pedagogy and educational leadership, we find an interesting dynamic on which specialized content takes the lead over instructional methods. At the same time, development of instructional methods is slowed by the faculty leadership's lack of exposure to methods outside those used in their own education, leading to a slower improvement cycle within the departments and units where the curriculum in firmly under the purview of domain specialists.

There are certainly exceptions to this rule. University and college Education departments will, one hopes, have faculty who specialize and conduct research in areas such as instructional methodologies, student outcomes, and current pedagogical theory. Other departments, such as Sociology of Psychology, may have faculty who have experience with adolescent behaviors or social dynamics, and who have at their heart a better understanding of how human beings in our society interact with others and their environment. But many, if not most, departments have faculty whose expertise lies outside those centered on the human mind and are, primarily, focused on the interaction of chemicals, the effects of radiation on organic tissues, the tensile strength of a particular alloy, and other areas of knowledge that look at the numerous other elements outside of our own human condition that make up our world.

The perspectives and mental meanderings I will share here come from my time spent as a manger of the curriculum for an Electrical and Computer Engineering department. The curriculum of the department is formed wholly by faculty whose fields and research range form integrated circuits, to quantum computing, to data science and machine learning. We are fortunate to have a few faculty who have looked into the research of student learning and methods of instruction but, for the most part, the faculty are brilliant members of their fields, and modify and monitor their courses from their own perspectives, with varyine degeress isolation from the rest of the curriculum. I look at the curriculum as an outsider, attempting to look into the fishbowl to see how the parts of the curriculum interact and move the learning of our students forward. There will be, I hope, some information that will cause others in higher education who have their fingers on the threads of their curriculum to pause, consider, and explore. 